[Music]
Good afternoon, I'm Edel, and I'm going to
give a presentation on the case of
depathologization.
I come from the Universidad Comput de Madrid
in the Faculty of Political Science and
Sociology. I'm currently on an
FPU doctoral scholarship and I'm doing one at the
beginning of my thesis project, which
starts this year, so there's still uh the
whole process of
fieldwork, but the idea of ​​the
project, the construction of the
research object. It arose from
approaches that I had during
my master's thesis. Well, uh.
Also, regarding this conference, with
respect to the entire
anti-psychiatry movement and what has been
raised from critical medical anthropology
uh on the issues that
affect Mental Health and
mental illness. Well, I find it
interesting, and also sharing the table
with crazy pride, I find
the case of a
social movement such as the
trans movement interesting, especially in the wake of the struggles
for depathologization uh that have been
emerging over the years and that.
that can allow for an
interesting debate when the
presentation is over Well this
thesis project revolves this presentation will revolve
mainly around the
more theoretical part a point of state of the
question a starting point to
generate debate the more
methodological part I have left a little more uh
to the side and But well later if
questions arise I can I clarify
those those topics uh the thesis is titled
about trans depathologization
a subjective socio-approach to
trans trajectories well uh As a
starting point I would like to start from
a phrase from the manifesto of the
2012 STP campaign when the entire
trans movement emerged in the Spanish state in
Barcelona and later in Madrid which
says this trans activists from all over the
world from different continents and
cities we
take to the streets again to demand trans depathologization under the slogan trans identities are not an illness we denounce that even today in the 21st century trans transsexual transgender transvestite identities are still present as gender incongruence or transvestism disorder in  recently published
draft of the dsm5 we demand the
delisting of the
international catalogs of diseases of smm and
iec and we fight for the right to decide
autonomously over our own
bodies the discourse of pathologization
has collapsed we have torn it down
by denouncing these therapies year
after year there are no more excuses
there are ideas that can no longer be defended
well this is part as I mentioned
of the excerpt from the manifesto of the network
for the depathologization of trans that
began in the Spanish state especially
starting from the year 2009 2010 and
that later moved to
other cities in Madrid where it
was also an important point of
resistance with respect to this and well it
serves me especially as a
starting point to raise what
interests me uh in this case of my
thesis project which is the way in which
these processes of depoliticization arise
uh with respect to
issues that were uh so to
speak uh trapped or
constructed from a in this case a
biomedical and medicolegal discourse not
good  uh as a starting point we could
say that transsexuality uh arises in
the medical legal field, that's where it
begins to have a name, a
clear nominalization, as is the term
transsexuality, it began in the year
yes, we look for a milestone of the specific moment
in 1966 with the medical author Harry
Benjamin and his book the
transsexual phenomenon, well here I would start, it's not that he
was the only one who was
raising this question but his
book uh served as a kind of
theoretical and disciplinary development with
regard to the case of
trans people, especially in
endocrinological and psychological therapies for
sex change,
and well, apart from this author, there were
others such as Norman Fisk, who
was the one who constructed and created the
diagnosis of gender dysphoria, and
well, other authors such as John Money, a
psychologist who, well, who was
the pioneer in regards to the
construction or or the idea of
gender identity, not this idea of
uh that people, especially
trans people in this case, possess an
internal identity uh that does not correspond in
this case with their body, the idea of
Benjamin  He was a defender of
necrological therapy to alleviate this
incongruity or this failure, so to
speak, between what he mentioned as a
wrong body in which people
uh possessed a mind of the other gender and
that they therefore had to undergo
medical, hormonal, and
psychological treatment in order to live in accordance with
their felt sex.
Well, at that time, yes, as in
the entire scientific and medical community, and
constantly, there has never been,
so to speak, a consensus. In this case, there were
some psychologists, especially
psychotherapists, psychoanalysts, who,
defending this idea of
sexual identity and transsexuality,
considered that it was more important to
treat these cases with
psychotherapeutic and psychological therapy rather than
through hormonal therapies. I mean, there
were a series of debates
regarding how to treat these cases. Well,
what we find in any case
is in this case, health professionals
who begin to construct, from the
point of view of even the sociology
of science, we could say what
the transsexual phenomenon is. Not for them,
well, as it appears in this slide,
which is also part of an article
by  from the fairly recent neuropsychiatry journal,
eh, the scientific community itself is
aware of these changes that have
existed with respect to what is eh
transsexuality and the changes in
nominalization and
diagnostic classification, that is to say, in this very baen
eh of lack of consensus of Decisions
With respect to this, this, this
population,
eh, well, they have been varying over
the
years, in addition, these changes,
eh, we should not see them in
isolation, but rather they have to do with
what I am interested in mentioning, and that is the
shifts that
social activism allows, in this case,
trans activism and its fight for
diagnostic depathologization and declassification. This makes the
medical population, I heard the medical and expert community say, and they
end up
eh considering these diagnoses and
reformulating them with other terms,
and as we will see from other
classifications,
eh, well, this question of
classification, I consider it
important to mention it, citing
medical anthropologist authors such as Caponi and
Martínez Hernández who speak of this
classificatory spirit, especially in the case  of
psychiatry
as they mention is like a
way we could even say
phantasmagorical anar rative of posing
human behaviors above all it arises from the
crepan model not of kin
and important
and an important figure within
psychiatry who was the one who began with
this model not the crep liano model
what would consist is eh Well in the end
assuming any human behavior
within a diagnostic classification
in this case the mod of
mental disorders that as we see well will
grow over the years with
respect to what is considered a
mental disorder is not inflated eh So to speak the
manual and eh the behaviors would be
reduced to a series of
symptomatologies eh classified
as a mental disorder no in this
case they would enter everything that are the
disorders that would be considered
disorders for from this point of view of
sexual behaviors
sexual deviations and
e but as we see it is not reduced
only to this not in the case of
transsexuality yes it would be within
eh eh the question of
sexual deviation and and and homosexuality
is also quite linked this
question well  uh with I would like to start
from this phrase of
anti-psychiatry
in the experience I am interested in highlighting
the term experience because it
is precisely from a phenomenological point of view
that I want to do my
doctoral thesis, that is to say, starting from the
vital trajectories of
trans people from the vital experiences and
from the experiences of these subjects,
not being my object of research uh
I consider that the
scientific community the medical-legal construction
of the human experience has ended
uh classifying classifying uh
behaviors classifying
diversity uh to make it more
understandable within the
medical frameworks. This causes it to end up
being constructed as a deviation from
the Norm, that is to say, sexual deviation. It
is not that it exists as such but rather it is
precisely a term that
arose from the
medical community itself, especially
carried out from the 10th century onwards, as authors like
Foucault propose. Well, it is precisely some
authors of the sociology of
deviation and the anthropology of
sexuality uh of sociology like
Howard Becker in his book Outsiders, who
says when a deviant is caught,
he is treated according to the
popular diagnosis that explains why he is  and how it is
and the treatment itself can in
turn deepen its
deviation well This serves me as a
starting point to understand that
sexual deviation is a
concept that arose precisely from
this place and that allowed us to
construct what we understand by
homosexuality transsexuality
heterosexuality that is to say they are not
natural components but they arise
precisely from this non-
psychiatric narrative we see how there is also a
paradigm shift from the point of
criminalization of sexual deviation
that was more
typical well the 20th century in the case of the
Spanish context stands out the law of vagrants
and criminals with all the the the
persecution especially in the case of
homosexuals and and and trans women
transsexuals in this case and
transvestites of eh of behaviors that
went outside the Norm that
the Franco regime proposed this meant the
incarceration the physical punishment of this
population this later was
moving to another paradigm which was that
of medicine psychiatry and from
there stand out well doctors like López
Ibor
and who was a pioneer in this case within
the Franco regime and the dictatorship
of eh going to pathologize  and considering an
illness a deviation
eh or disorder and everything that
homosexual and
transsexual behavior entails. Well, I analyze this above
all to understand
how sexual deviation and all this
has to be understood from a
historical and sociological point of view and not so much
from a naturalistic or biological point of view
because it is precisely in
this journey in this
even genealogical trajectory of sexuality
that we can understand eh the point where
we are right now.
Well, eh. In this case, I want to highlight
subjectivity because it is the topic that
interests me, eh, especially in my thesis, in this
case, subjectivity, trams, and for
that, I start from authors like M. Foucault and
P. It is a sociological analysis, and well, in the
case of Mel Foucault, he is a
structuralist in the case
of sociological and relational, especially
because of this idea of ​​​​the
relational theory of understanding the subject, that is to
say, I do not conceive of the subject or what we call a
subject as an isolated individual or eh.
As it could be from a
more clinical psychology point of view, a
psychology eh that poses the individual
as in an isolated manner and  that builds
his mind or his subjectivity his
experience from
internal approaches that he has eh as I do not
relate it to a kind of simple
sociologism or understanding the subject
according to Only what happens
eh what happens to him because of
social problems, that is to say that he is
totally eh lacked agency to
decide about his his his
life experience eh I am more interested in proposing a
subjectivity from a more
relational and social point of view. But with this
tension not without generating nor that it is
individualistic nor eh sociological. No. Well,
my approach in this case is that
the subject is constructed through
relationships with others as a
social agent and with affective ties, that
is to say, how these relationships affect him
and how eh he analyzes them eh as a
subject, how he lives them
and that is why I rescue this
positional and affective character in the subject
denunciation as a social agent because he
maintains relationships with others with
other instances or social worlds that
configure him and affect him in
multiple
ways, this is how I understand the
trans trajectories or the transits of
people who carry  a
change a questioning of their
gender identity and the person
relates to themselves and their
transitions but also with other
instances that configure and
affect them in multiple ways and
directions because as we will see with
processes of taking subjective positions
and modes of subjectivation eh As is the
case of the medicalization of
transitions or their politicization
eh in the end it is to understand the
trans trajectories from a diverse point of view and
crossed by constant relations of
power and resistance at the same time of
escapes and transformations well I will
go through this a little bit later to
explain it better
eh But well The idea is this not
well in the case of
trans subjectivity and what I conceive as trans objective
is this point of related in this case there
would be different instances that
affect them eh I rescue the
family sphere although not so much in this one in this
presentation and above all to rescue the
medical legal sphere as I have mentioned and
the activist sphere and in the center what I
propose as the sexog gender system
or the biopolitics of
sexual identity What is the  sex gender system
well eh I suppose you've heard
of this concept of the idea that
sex and gender are
both social constructions in this case what
authors like J Paul Paul propose is in the
end to propose this idea precisely
of gender subjectivity and
sexual subjectivity from a constructive point of view
for
Jitler what would be the construction this
gender system is the naturalization that has been
made to the bodies and to the
individuals of all from a whole
series of eh repetitions or reiterations
eh that
affect above all the language not in
this case the binary language the
binary language eh that constructs
reality and constructs the materiality of
the
bodies in the case of the generalization
of the bodies we no longer only talk about the fact
that gender is a construction that
affects the roles or that affects the
gender expression of people that is to
say that there are masculine women or
feminine men or vice versa but
we talk about understanding that and
that the bodies themselves are
socially constructed and generalized
from a naturalization that has been
made of certain
physical characteristics in this case associated with the
masculine or feminine  uh this is
this determination of
physical characteristics from a generalized point of
view that is not
carried out in an
isolated or decisive manner but rather through
a series of social norms
interactions performativity as speech
that are
projected onto individuals, that is to
say that they restrict and that are coercive
with respect to how they understand their
bodies in this case we can understand
that gender is not not a lesson
but rather it is constructed for all
individuals not only
trans people but from
social norms that are constructed performa
not from acts of the
haa a little to rescue this idea
above all what sexual identity intends
is that sexual identity does not
exist as such but rather through this
same
and this same construction not
naturalization of it and that is to say what is
conceived as man or woman in the
end is the result of what I was talking about
this performativity and this uh
social coercion uh of a generalized system
Okay, Rescuing a
depreciated word that says within the framework of the
contrasexual contract the bodies
recognize themselves as men or
women  but as speaking bodies and
recognize others as
speaking bodies they recognize themselves the
possibility of accessing all the
signifying practices as well as all
the positions of enunciation as
subjects that history has determined
as masculine feminine or
perverse well uh later
we can continue talking a little about this
issue but I consider that
trans people would be above all
crossed like the rest of the
individuals by this sexog gender system
and it is a social system that implies uh
social issues uh that do not
only concern individuals
uh with respect to the medicolegal machinery that I mentioned uh of the experience of transitioning in the end uh Well although there are a series of displacements through activism for trans depathologization currently it is still considered a pathology and it is still subject to the to the to the sm5 manual in this case the
diagnosis of gender dysplasia that is
separated by adolescents children and and
adults uh the only difference is that
well
and with the previous revisions the
previous manuals is that uh the
scientific community has separated
gender dysplasia from uh the part of the
disorders  sexual in order to try to give
a less stigmatized image of what
gender dysphoria or
gender discomfort implies, but it is still
within the manual, I mean, it is
simply as we see this in this same
process of scientific construction,
eh, that these displacements, these
tensions or debates with what with respect
to where to place eh the question of the
TR not within the TSM, eh also if we look at
the translation that was made into Spanish DSM
there are some changes with respect
to the manual of the English version in the
English version the word
gender is used and in the Spanish version the
term
sex is used. This in the end. Well, it is also
part of a way of sociologizing
everything that the experience
of transitions entails from a medical point of view,
separating from what I
mentioned all these questions of the
sexog gender system from
generalization and well, they consider that
sex understood in this case by the
scientific community as something natural,
something that is not part of the social.
Well, in the end it also allows for a
more neutral, more objective image of
what the diagnosis of
dysphoria implies. Not well, as we see  So here's
this idea of ​​a classificatory spirit of
talking about incongruity, not a
series of symptoms that doctors
should perform on people who
decide to undergo a transition
and be subject to this, to this
classification and that they fall into
this category, this diagnosis is not there.
Well, I conceive of this using a
concept from Foucault, Rescuing Mich
fou as a device, a
disciplinary device as he defines it, focus, it's
a technology of government with
which it is intended to create the
objective conditions to govern a group of
people. These devices, like those
mentioned by Varela, are articulated with
specific forms of exercising power,
in this case, objectification, the search
for scientific neutrality, eh, with
regard to the device and the formation
of specific knowledge, in this case,
medical psychological knowledge about
identity and about what
sexual identity implies in
particular. And finally, all of this would
lead to modes of subjectivation, in
this case, the medical conformation or the
pathologization of transitions and of
trans people. Eh, well, eh, my
hypothesis is that trans subjectivity or
Trans trajectories have been
geopolitically colonized through this whole
series of medical and
psychological devices that continue to operate
today, that is to say, although some are
reformulating, displacing them through
these activist struggles, there continues to exist
within the medical community a sort
of consensus on the decision that they
ultimately make with regard to what is
necessary, it does not stop these
experiences. Well, to rescue some
more devices apart from the diagnosis
of gender incongruence, there
is the real-life test or the
Minnesota test, the real-life test,
uh, was used more a few years ago,
now it is, uh, it is good because of the
current criticism that was made from
the trans movement, it is trying to be
removed. It is not true that the
younger generations of doctors
may not be familiar with it, but there are always
some glimpses with regard to
some questions, uh, ill-intentioned or well-
intentioned, that some
psychologists or some doctors ask when
people come for a consultation, and in
real life it would consist, well, basically,
of a series of questions or items that are
asked of trans people who come in to
see if they truly are trans.  I
mean, what this test means is to
understand if in childhood, throughout
your life, you have had desires, desires
that remain over time,
to belong to the other gender, that is to say,
some questions as basic as, as a
child, did you like soccer or did
you like dolls, etc., these are not
questions that, uh,
anyone could fail within what we
understand by gender roles,
but in the case of trans people, it is
used as a way to
see if the person truly, uh,
wants to belong to that other gender, not to
say, in the end. In these cases, what I
start with in interviews, what you can
see is that many people
end up adapting to this test and, uh,
performing
strategically within the consultation what they
conceive of as femininity or masculinity
so that the person, in this case, the
doctor, and especially the psychiatrist, the
psychologist, does not
deny them treatment, no, and
gives them the little piece of paper that implies
possessing that, that gender incongruence,
well in the case of the
Minnesota multiphasic personality inventory or
the  The Minnesota test is something that is
still being
used, in the end, what it consists of
is ruling out that the person has
another series of mental pathologies such as,
well, borderline
personality disorder, multiple personality disorder,
etc., not that they can be
assumed to be a way of having certain
doubts or certain problems with
regard to their identity, in the case that they
have another mental disorder, then they
could possibly be denied
access to this treatment, as has
happened in many cases, not of a
person who has bipolar disorder, eh
schizophrenia, LP, and the doctors decide
that this person is not in their
right mind to carry out a
transition of this type, not in case they might
regret it, etc. Well, as far as we
can understand, all these
devices, in the end, no longer only suppose
a control of subjectivity in a tral way
but of any subjectivity
that would fall within this, of
this, of this psychiatric diagnosis, that is to
say, people diagnosed
with other mental disorders or psychiatric disorders
could fall within this
loss of agency with regard to
their personal experience.  Transits and
their decisions uh
identity-based well returning to what I
mentioned about the politicization of the
trams I would like to rescue these two
images that are part of the
first campaigns that were used
in Barcelona uh For
uh that belonged to this campaign to
stop trans pathologies 2012 STP 2012
and so began a series of
demonstrations by
trans activists a series of talks
workshops debate spaces where we could talk
about this issue of uh what
gender implies what
transitions imply and how uh to fight for
a
diagnostic declassification to be carried out and to stop
considering trans identity
as an illness is something that is
also well that is related to the
process that homosexuality has had
homosexuality was also
considered an illness previously
and it was as a result of the
political struggles social movements of
homosexual LGBT and trans people
that uh well depathologizing and
decriminalizing this issue in the
case of trans people well we
continue  subject to
this to this biomedical, medical-
legal vision and well, the struggles in this
sense continue, what's interesting about
being something so recent is that it also allows us to
see, uh, what
this struggle for depathologization can contribute, a
process of depathologization
to other similar struggles, such as
the struggles for the struggles of
disabled people or the struggles
of psychiatric people, I don't
mean they have relationships that, It's good
that I consider that they are very
fruitful, uh, and that they can allow us to
understand, uh, to what extent
political resistance can be made.
Well, with regard to the
construction of
political subjectivities, I would like to highlight the author James Ranier, he
is an author who is well, who is part of
this more biopolitical current but who,
uh, does a bit of a critique of Foucault, who
Foucault usually focuses above all on
the
more political part in the sense of how
power subjects us, how power
restricts us, subjectivizes us and
oppresses us, uh, Jier, what he wants to highlight
above all is more the part
of, how  people resist that
power no Okay then well to
use some phrases that he uses there is no
politics Simply because the
poor put the rich before well it
must be said without a doubt that it is
politics this is the interruption of the
mere effects of the domination of the
rich that makes the poor exist
as an entity well with this
[Music]
example of the poor and the
rich laugh comes to say that the poor It
is not that they exist
previously or that they exist by themselves
by themselves that is to say not that the
poor exist or that the working class exists it is
precisely that the poor or the
working class is constructed as an
identity as a political entity
because they exist uh in this case rich who
take the surplus value or uh or have more
money and in this case they dominate
through capitalist domination a
whole of the population or
half of the population that is to say the struggle
of the working class in any case it would be
to overthrow this bourgeoisie and that
finally there would be a struggle a
classless society no Well then Something
similar we can see in the case of
trans people and these struggles as well as
in  the case of
psychiatric or disabled people is not that they
exist as such as a
natural entity or that they possess in
themselves a minority difference with
respect to the
population as a whole but it is precisely that well
Beyond the existence of
human diversity, it is
precisely the name of the trans, the
homosexual, the heterosexual
and in this case of sexual minorities
that are politically constructed as
a community precisely to
uh to make themselves visible to show
that there is something in the order of
things, in the natural order of things
with which they do not agree,
well in this case,
this idea of ​​disagreement with
the sensible order stands out a lot, the distribution of the
sensible, the naturalized order of
things. Uh so the difference
between the police and politics, the
police would be this form of
government, this hierarchical distribution of
functions and positions in the community
where some have more, some have less,
but also where, for example, the
medical-legal community, the
scientific community, uh, objectifies or
pathologizes politics, which is this
process by which this
social order or distribution of the sensible is
interrupted.  from
emancipatory processes of new
political subjectivities Well in this case the
political would be no longer the government
but uh that political community that is
built uh by the people
who feel
oppressed or who are affected by a
certain oppression
and well in this case to rescue this
more contingent character of what
political subjectivity implies the
political subject and in this case the
contingency that supposes a process
of such magnitude as the
depathologization of an experience not
uh Well summarizing regarding
this presentation of the
STP campaign of ST trans pation
Uh well I wanted a little uh for it to serve
as a debate uh to talk about what it
implies to constitute oneself as a
political subject in this case uh of subjects or
of people who have been subject to an
objectified view of reality that more
than subjects have been constructed as
objects of study scientific objects and
what it means to become subjects no,
what it implies uh to take the floor uh to
talk about the experience from a point
of view uh from another place no uh  to
build a series of discourses on
the experience that uh that also
interact with those of
medicine itself is not to say It's not that it's not that
talking about depathologization by itself is
going to depathologize uh the
trans identity because it is precisely in this in
this order of things that there is a
constant tension between those who
dominate the truth or in this case
uh who become knowers of the truth
as is the case of
scientific neutrality but that as we see is
part of a whole series of
historical and political displacements and
that this tension also supposes not of
depathologizing something and on the other hand another
question that I pose for debate
is what does it mean to speak in this case
of the personal being political uh As we
see uh Well the personal is political
is an issue that
the feminist movements have rescued the feminist struggle
uh practically always not of
understanding that politics uh affects not
only the ideological sphere but it
is that this very thing is directly
rooted in our subjectivity and in
our most intimate experience no
then well uh let's see in this case what it
implies  In the case of
trans depathologization and in the case of
other struggles such as the anti-ableist or
anti-psychiatric ones,
well with this I close the presentation and
I would like for us to be able to chat
about this issue and So I leave the
time I have left to clarify
doubts and to generate comments
also with this what
the
politicization of the experience implies.
Thank you very much.